so let's get started the speed of this
spread is quite something countries are
ramping up their response their
restrictions social distancing
self-isolation Jake is that the right
approach do you think so the World
Health Organization has already said
that this is a public health emergency
of international concern they recently
said that it's characterized as a
pandemic that just means that it's in a
lot of countries around the world now so
this is a serious situation countries do
need to focus on their efforts to try
and slow down the spread limit the
spread of infection I just want to put
on to our screen a graph that's gone
viral in recent days because it's a
really good visual illustration of what
the strategy is for governments there
you see that spike on the left-hand side
that is if no restrictions are in place
and what governments are trying to do is
to flatten that line the yellow line
because the horizontal line that goes
across the screen is the key one that is
whether health systems have the capacity
to cope with the numbers of infections
so that is the strategy to avoid that
big peak and to flatten it down spread
out the number of cases over the time
line now Katherine we keep being told
politicians are following the science
but there are political decisions and
political choices in this because
different governments are making
different choices on things like public
gatherings on sporting events on school
closures yeah and the science doesn't
change that much the decisions for each
country does so we know that every
country around the world is trying to do
the same thing they're trying to as you
said flatten that peak spread out the
cases slow it down and delay it but it's
a balancing act because at the same time
they're trying to figure out the sort of
impacts of that on their country on
their economies on people's lives on
people's mental health even being
isolated for so long that's the
balancing act in each country is coming
to different decisions well stay with me
because a lot of pretty basic questions
around self isolation his our medical
correspondent Fergus Walsh have a look
at this
[Music]
if you're told to self isolate that
means staying at home not going to work
school or other public places you
shouldn't have any visitors
if you develop symptoms a fever or cough
then seek advice first by phone don't
just turn up at a Medical Center or
Hospital if you live with others then
you need to stay in a well-ventilated
bedroom with the door shut if you have
to share a bathroom then use it after
everyone else don't share towels and
toiletries your waist should be double
bagged if you test positive
it'll be separately disposed on if you
live on your own you can order shopping
online or get friends to help but they
should leave it on the doorstep the
corona virus causes a mild illness for 4
out of 5 people self isolating will help
protect older people and those with
underlying health problems from getting
infected
[Music]
so that's self isolation what is life in
lockdown like though this is how one a
family who don't have symptoms are
actually coping with those massive
government restrictions now in place in
Italy have a look she's my sister
Margaretta hi for me is a new experience
and miss a lot my friends but me my
teacher Samaritan set up a distance
learning platform for a study this is my
dad hi hi it was quite difficult and
challenging first time but we did
in a couple of days we're all adapting
to smart working and I think it's a big
kickoff in balancing work life and
family life it's tough but we did it
well a little snapshot
film there on a mobile phone which takes
me nicely to a question from Linda on
Twitter who are as we touch our Mobile's
all the time how and how often should we
actually clean our Mobile's Kathryn take
that question so Linda the advice on
this is actually quite surprising
because if you think of how many people
touch your mobile phone generally it's
just you so yes you could shred the
virus onto it but because not many other
people touch it it's not too much of a
risk but still actually some smartphone
manufacturers have actually changed
their advice so generally if you think
the advice has always been clean it with
a lint cloth now they're saying yeah you
can use some antibiotic wipes and try
not to get them wet though and in terms
of more general advice in terms of hard
surfaces soft services public transport
so hard surfaces let's say for example I
sneezed right now and the droplets would
be in the air they would land on the
desk on the phone you're not going to
get them from touching it but they would
be there and they would slowly sort of
the germs of slow disintegrate over
essentially up to 72 hours so this is
why it is so important to wash your
hands because if you then touch those
surfaces and then touch to your eyes
your nose your mouth you'd bring in the
germs in so for example on public
transport its use your common sense wash
your hands when you finished try and
keep away from people if someone's
sneezing get in the next carriage Kevin
thanks very much we saw just a snapshot
from Italy the biggest outbreak outside
of China of course is Italy and many of
you have actually been asking why
or his lewis italy's government locked
down the whole country on Monday and
this graph tells us why the virus is
spreading at speed late February there
were a couple of hundred new cases are
being reported each day within 10 days
it was 10 times that and the mortality
rate appears to be higher than the
global average so let's compare that to
say South Korea which also has a large
number of cases but where there are far
fewer deaths and let's take a look at
this map which shows the infection rate
slowing which begs the question by the
difference well first is the rate of
testing and we can look at this graph by
Business Insider compares eight
countries it shows that as of the 8th of
March South Korea was doing almost 4000
tests per million people Italy was
testing 826 per million people now fewer
tests
I mean milder cases going undetected and
that means a lower overall number of
cases which in turn are pushes the
mortality rate up so Italy's number of
cases may be higher than we think and
the mortality rate may be lower the
second factor is that Italy has the
second oldest population in the world 23
percent of the population is over 65 and
we know that older people are much more
vulnerable to this virus now the third
factor is timing February is peak flu
season which means earlier cases were
missed and we can take a look at this
quote from one infectious disease expert
in Italy saying that they started
unnoticed which means by the time we
realized it there are a lot of
transmission chains happening now if we
go back to Italy and look at the fourth
factor which is population density in
northern Italy but so many ill people
within a particular region you get
higher rates of infection and then
greater pressure on hospital resources
so what began there as a concern in
February is now a national crisis as
being watched for that prehension
by people across Europe